Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will look at wireless network
security.
Specifically, exam topic 1.11.d, encryption,
and exam topic 5.9, describe wireless security
protocols, WPA, WPA2, and WPA3.
You’ve probably noticed by now that there
are a lot of new concepts that you need to
learn to understand wireless networks.
Wireless security is no exception, and this
video will be an overview of a lot of new
concepts.
So, take notes and do extra research if you
have to, but make sure you have a basic understanding
of the concepts introduced in this video before
you take the CCNA exam.
Here’s what we’ll cover.
First I’ll give a brief introduction to
wireless network security and summarize what
we’ll cover later in the video.
Then I’ll introduce various authentication
methods, ranging from not-so-secure methods
to the most secure methods used in modern
networks.
Then I’ll introduce various encryption and
integrity methods.
Encryption plays a role in all kinds of networks,
but it’s especially important in wireless
networks because a signal can be received
by anyone within range of the sender, not
just the intended recipient.
And integrity means making sure that messages
aren’t modified by any attackers while in
transit.
Finally we’ll look at Wi-Fi Protected Access,
WPA, which was developed by the Wi-Fi alliance
to provide standard sets of wireless network
security protocols.
Watch until the end of the video for a bonus
practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
As you know, security is important in all
networks.
However, it’s even more essential in wireless
The main reason for that is: because wireless
signals are not contained within a wire, any
device within range of the signal can receive
the traffic.
In wired networks, traffic is often only encrypted
when sent over an untrusted network such as
the Internet.
You usually don’t encrypt wired traffic
within the LAN, for example.
But in wireless networks, it is very important
to encrypt traffic sent between the wireless
clients and the AP.
That’s because, as I said before, any device
within range of the signal can receive the
traffic, but we want to ensure that only the
intended recipient or recipients can read
it.
So, in this video we will cover three main
concepts, authentication, encryption, and
integrity.
You’ve heard these terms before, but let’s
look at them from a wireless perspective.
We’ll look at these in more depth later
in the video, but first here’s a quick overview
of each.
First, authentication.
As mentioned in the previous video, all clients
must be authenticated before they can associate
with an AP.
Authentication just means verifying the identity
of a user and/or device.
In a corporate setting, only trusted users
and devices should be given access to the
network.
However, a separate SSID which doesn’t have
access to the corporate network can also be
provided for guest users.
Those guest SSIDs have less strict authentication
requirements, and probably only give access
to the Internet, not to internal company resources.
Not only should the AP authenticate the identity
of clients, ideally the clients should also
authenticate the AP to avoid associating with
a malicious AP.
A malicious AP could trick users into associating
with it, and then it can carry out attacks
such as a man-in-the-middle attack.
There are multiple ways that authentication
can be carried out, for example with a password,
a username and password combination, or with
digital certificates installed on the devices.
For review, remember that before associating
with an AP, the client must first go through
an authentication process like this.
Okay, we’ll look at authentication in more
detail soon but let’s introduce the next
concept.
Next is encryption.
Traffic sent between clients and APs, so any
wireless traffic, should be encrypted so that
it can’t be read by anyone except the AP
and the client.
You should know this already, but encryption
means scrambling up the message so that only
the sender and the intended recipient can
read it.
There are many possible protocols that can
be used to encrypt traffic.
It’s important that the sender and recipient
use the same protocol, or else it would be
like they are speaking different languages.
The recipient wouldn’t be able to decrypt
the sender’s messages.
Note that all devices on the wireless LAN
will use the same encryption protocol, however
each client will use a unique encryption and
decryption key so that other devices can’t
read its traffic.
Only the AP will have the appropriate key
to decrypt the client’s traffic, the other
clients won’t be able to decrypt it because
they are using different keys.
However there is also a ‘group key’ which
is used by the AP to encrypt traffic it wants
to send to all of its clients.
All of those clients keep a copy of that group
key so they can decrypt the traffic.
Again, we’ll look at wireless encryption
methods in greater detail soon, but before
that let’s introduce the final concept,
integrity.
As explained in the security fundamentals
video of the course, integrity ensures that
a message is not modified by a third party,
it is not modified in-transit.
So, the message that is sent by the source
host should be the same as the message that
is received by the destination host.
To ensure that, a MIC, message integrity check,
is added to messages to help protect their
integrity.
To demonstrate how it works, let’s say the
PC on the left is a client of the AP on the
right.
First, the sender calculates a MIC for the
message and attaches it to the message.
Just like encryption, there are many different
protocols that can be used to calculate this
MIC, and it’s important that the sender
and receiver use the same protocol.
Then the sender encrypts the message and MIC,
and sends the frame.
The recipient decrypts the message, and then
independently calculates a MIC for the message,
using the same protocol as the sender.
It compares the two MICs, and if the MIC calculated
by the sender and the MIC calculated by the
recipient are the same, the recipient assumes
the message wasn’t tampered with.
Note that if the two MICs aren’t the same,
if they are different, the message will be
discarded.
So, instead of saying a MIC helps to protect
the integrity of messages, it could be more
accurate to say that it helps to identify
if the integrity of a message has been compromised
or not.
If the integrity has been compromised, the
message will be discarded.
Now let’s move on to look at various wireless
authentication methods.
This will just be an overview of various authentication
methods, we won’t be going in depth.
However, we will be covering a lot of them.
Here they are, 7 different methods.
The good news is you don’t need know to
any of them in depth.
Just a basic understanding of each is fine.
But make sure you take notes.
Even though you only need a basic understanding,
it can be easy to mix up these different authentication
methods when first learning them.
The original 802.11 standard included two
options for authentication.
The first one is open authentication, which
is very simple.
The client sends an authentication request,
and the AP accepts it.
No questions asked, no credentials required.
So, this is clearly not a secure authentication
method.
The AP just accepts all authentication requests.
However, it is still used today in combination
with other authentication methods.
After the client is authenticated and associated
with the AP, it’s possible to require the
user to authenticate via other methods before
access to the network is granted.
Think about Starbucks WiFi, or other public
WiFi.
You might be free to associate your device
with the AP without even entering a password,
but then you are probably required to login
via a web page or something like that to authenticate.
After that authentication, your device is
granted access to the Internet.
So, open authentication itself is not secure
at all, but it can be combined with other
methods.
Then the second method in the 802.11 standard
is WEP, wired equivalent privacy.
Actually WEP is not just an authentication
method, it provides encryption too.
For encryption, it uses the RC4 algorithm.
If you’re curious about RC4 try reading
on Wikipedia, but for the CCNA I recommend
just knowing its name.
WEP is a shared-key protocol, it requires
the sender and receiver to have the same key,
a shared key.
Those WEP keys can be 40 bits or 104 bits
in length.
However those above keys are combined with
a 24-bit initialization vector to bring the
total length to 64 bits or 128 bits.
Again, read up on wikipedia if you’re curious
about the purpose of an initialization vector,
but you don’t have to know it for the CCNA.
Now, usually longer key lengths are more secure,
but WEP is NOT secure and can be easily cracked,
regardless of the key length.
You definitely should not use WEP on modern
wireless networks.
So, that’s WEP encryption, but how can WEP
be used to authenticate a device?
Here’s how it goes.
First, the AP sends a ‘challenge phrase’.
This is just a series of bits, the actual
contents don’t matter.
The client then encrypts the challenge phrase
using the WEP key and sends it back.
Finally the AP takes the client’s encrypted
challenge phrase and compares it to the AP’s
own encrypted challenge phrase.
If they match, it means the AP and client
used the same key to encrypt the phrase, so
the authentication is successful.
Basically, the AP is just testing if the client
knows the shared key or not.
Note that WEP can be used just to provide
encryption, or to provide both encryption
and authentication.
If WEP authentication is not used, open authentication
will be used and WEP will only be used for
encryption.
Okay, I just covered the first two options
for authentication, Open and WEP.
However, open authentication on its own is
not secure, and WEP is definitely not secure
either as an encryption method or an authentication
method.
So, new wireless authentication methods were
needed.
Now let’s look at those more secure methods,
the different variations of EAP, extensible
authentication protocol.
EAP itself isn’t a single authentication
protocol, but rather a framework which many
other protocols, called EAP methods, are based
on, such LEAP, EAP-FAST, etc.
So, what is EAP?
It is an authentication framework.
It defines a standard set of authentication
functions that are used by the various EAP
methods.
We will look at four of those methods: LEAP,
EAP-FAST, PEAP, and EAP-TLS.
Note that EAP is integrated with a protocol
called 802.1X, which provides port-based network
access control.
Let me explain.
802.1X is used to limit network access for
clients connected to a LAN or wireless LAN
until they authenticate.
Here are some specifics.
There are three main entities in 802.1X.
First, the supplicant.
This is the device that wants to connect to
the network.
Then there is the authenticator.
This is the device that provides access to
the network.
Finally, the authentication server.
This is the device that receives client credentials
and permits or denies access.
802.1X is used in all kinds of networks, both
wired and wireless, so you definitely should
know these three definitions, supplicant,
authenticator, and authentication server.
In an 802.11 wireless LAN, the supplicant
is the client that wants to connect to the
network, for example a laptop.
The authenticator is the device that provides
access to the network, the access point.
But actually, in a split-MAC architecture
it’s the wireless LAN controller that manages
the authentication, not the AP itself.
And the authentication server is usually a
RADIUS server.
So, here’s how it works.
The 802.11 wireless authentication required
to associate with the AP is simply open authentication.
Now the client is associated.
However, it does not yet have full access
to the network.
The only traffic allowed from the client is
traffic required for EAP authentication.
And it is the authentication server that will
check the client’s credentials and decide
to permit access or deny access to the network.
So, the WLC is now a middle-man in the authentication
process.
The 802.11 authentication required to simply
associate with the AP is open, but then there
is the additional step of EAP authentication
that is required to get access to the network.
So, let’s look at some different EAP authentication
methods used in wireless LANs.
The first is LEAP, lightweight EAP.
It was developed by Cisco as an improvement
over WEP.
Here’s how it works.
Clients must provide a username and password
to authenticate.
But in addition to that, mutual authentication
is provided by both the client and server
sending a challenge phrase to each other.
In WEP, only the server sent a challenge phrase,
but in LEAP both client and server send challenge
phrases.
So, first challenge phrases are exchanged,
then each device encrypts the other’s challenge
phrase and sends it back, and they use that
to authenticate each other like in WEP.
To further improve the security, dynamic WEP
keys are used.
These are WEP keys that automatically change
over time, to make it harder to crack the
encryption.
However, like WEP, LEAP is considered vulnerable
and should not be used anymore.
Instead, you should use one of the next methods.
The next method is EAP-FAST, EAP flexible
authentication via secure tunneling.
This was also developed by Cisco.
It consists of three phases.
First, a PAC, protected access credential,
is generated and passed from the server to
the client.
Like this.
This PAC is like a shared key and is used
in the next phase, to establish a secure TLS
tunnel between the client and authentication
server.
So, now there is a secure tunnel established
that can be used for secure encrypted communications.
The final step is that the client is authenticated
within the TLS tunnel.
Okay, that’s EAP-FAST.
The last two methods are similar to EAP-FAST,
but different in some key ways.
Next is PEAP, protected EAP.
Like EAP-FAST, it involves establishing a
secure TLS tunnel between the client and server.
But instead of a PAC, the server has a digital
certificate.
It will show its digital certificate to the
client, and the client uses this to authenticate
the server.
This certificate is also used to establish
the secure TLS tunnel.
And because only the server provides a certificate
for authentication, the client must still
be authenticated within the secure tunnel.
One protocol that can be used for that authentication
is called MS-CHAP, Microsoft Challenge Handshake
Authentication Protocol.
So, that’s PEAP.
Remember that EAP-FAST uses a PAC, but PEAP
uses a digital certificate.
However both involve establishing a secure
tunnel and then authenticating the client
inside of that tunnel.
And finally the last authentication method
is EAP-TLS, EAP transport layer security.
Whereas PEAP only requires the AS, authentication
server, to have a certificate, EAP-TLS requires
a certificate on the AS and on every single
client.
It is considered the most secure authentication
method, but it is more difficult to implement
than PEAP because every client device needs
a certificate.
That can add a lot of complexity, time, and
effort.
Because the client and server authenticate
each other with digital certificates, there
is no need to authenticate the client within
the TLS tunnel.
However, the TLS tunnel is still used to exchange
encryption key information, and we will be
talking about different encryption methods
next.
To summarize, EAP-TLS is the most secure authentication
method, but it takes more effort to implement,
so many enterprises might prefer PEAP instead.
So, those are the authentication methods you
should be aware of for the CCNA.
To really understand these protocols you will
need a lot more information than I gave you
in this section.
But the goal of this video is just to give
an overview, not to get deep into the details.
And remember, authentication refers to verifying
the identity of a device or user.
Although I did mention encryption throughout
this section, in the next section we will
talk about specific encryption methods used
to keep data private and secure.
So, these are the encryption methods, in addition
to integrity methods, we will discuss.
TKIP, CCMP, and GCMP.
We could include WEP in this list too, but
I already mentioned it in the previous section.
As I said before, encryption of wireless traffic
is absolutely essential, so make sure you
have a basic understanding of these encryption
methods.
First up, TKIP, temporal key integrity protocol.
As I said before, WEP was found to be vulnerable,
however wireless hardware at the time was
developed to use WEP.
So, a temporary solution based on WEP was
needed until a new standard was created and
new hardware was built.
That temporary solution was TKIP.
It’s based on WEP but adds various security
features.
Now, I’m going to give you a list here but
I don’t think you need to memorize it.
Just understand that TKIP is like a more secure
version of WEP.
So, TKIP uses a MIC to protect the integrity
of messages.
Hopefully you remember what a MIC is from
earlier in the video.
Also a key mixing algorithm is used to create
a unique WEP key for every frame, instead
of each frame using the same key.
This makes it harder to crack the encryption.
The initialization vector, which I mentioned
earlier, is doubled from 24 bits to 48 bits,
which makes brute-force attacks to crack the
encryption much more difficult.
The MIC includes the sender MAC address, used
to prove the identity of the frame’s sender.
Also a timestamp is added, so attackers can’t
do a replay attack.
Replay attacks involve re-sending frames that
have already been sent.
Check wikipedia if you want to get an overview
of replay attacks.
Similarly, a TKIP sequence number keeps track
of frames sent from a source MAC address.
This also protects against replay attacks,
because a frame will be dropped if the sequence
counter is incorrect.
As I said, you probably don’t have to memorize
all of the above features.
Just know that TKIP was developed as a more-secure
temporary solution after WEP was found to
be vulnerable.
And know that TKIP is used in WPA, WiFi Protected
Access version 1, which will be discussed
in the next section.
Next up is CCMP, counter/CBC-MAC protocol.
It was developed after TKIP and is more secure.
It is used in WPA2, and again I will explain
WPA in the next section.
Note that for a device to use CCMP, it must
be supported by the device’s hardware.
Old hardware built only to use WEP or TKIP
cannot use CCMP.
It consists of two different algorithms to
provide encryption and a message integrity
check.
For encryption, it uses AES counter mode.
AES is the most secure encryption protocol
currently available and is used all over the
world by corporations, governments, etc.
There are multiple modes of operation for
AES, and CCMP uses what’s called ‘counter
mode’ because it offers high performance,
high speed.
Then it uses CBC-MAC, cipher block chaining
message authentication code, as a message
integrity check to ensure the integrity of
messages.
You don’t have to know exactly how CBC-MAC
works, just know that it’s a kind of MIC.
So, that’s how CCMP provides encryption
and integrity.
Finally there is GCMP, galois counter mode
protocol.
It is more secure and more efficient than
CCMP, and its efficiency allows higher data
throughput than CCMP.
It is used in WiFi Protected Access 3.
Like CCMP, it consists of two algorithms.
First, AES counter mode encryption.
And then GMAC, Galois Message Authentication
Code which is used as a MIC to ensure the
integrity of messages.
Again, don’t worry about exactly how GMAC
works, just know that it’s a kind of MIC.
So, those are the encryption methods you need
to know.
Again, remember that I also introduced WEP
earlier and it is used for encryption also.
I’ve added some basic notes about each protocol
below.
So far we’ve covered a lot of different
authentication and encryption methods.
Make sure you have taken notes on each and
know their similarities and differences.
Now, with so many different authentication,
encryption, and integrity methods, which ones
should we choose?
Which combinations work together and which
don’t?
And how can we know which hardware supports
which standards?
To simplify things and create standard sets
of protocols to be used, the WiFi alliance
developed the WPA, WiFi Protected Access,
industry certifications.
Let’s look at WPA now.
The Wi-Fi alliance has developed three WPA
certifications for wireless devices, WPA,
WPA2, and WPA3.
Note that the first one is just called WPA,
not WPA1.
For a device to be WPA certified, it must
be tested in authorized testing labs.
This is just like how the Wi-Fi alliance certifies
devices for WiFi4, WiFi 5, WiFi 6, etc.
They also certify devices for WPA, WPA2, and
WPA3 security.
All three of the WPAs support two different
authentication modes.
First is personal mode, in which a pre-shared
key, PSK, is used for authentication.
For example, when you connect to a home wifi
network, enter the password and are authenticated,
that is personal mode.
It’s common in small networks, such as SOHO
networks.
Note that for security purposes, the PSK itself
isn’t actually sent over the air.
A four-way handshake is used for the authentication,
and the PSK is used to generate encryption
keys.
If the devices use the same PSK to generate
the encryption keys, they will be able to
decrypt each other’s traffic, meaning that
they will know that the other device is using
the same PSK.
In addition to personal mode, there is enterprise
mode.
This is the mode that uses 802.1X with an
authentication server.
I introduced a few EAP methods and they are
used with enterprise mode, although WPA doesn’t
specify any specific method.
So, all EAP methods are supported, such as
PEAP or EAP-TLS.
Now let’s look at WPA, WPA2, and WPA3.
The first WPA certification was developed
after WEP was proven to be vulnerable and
it includes the following protocols.
TKIP, which as you know is based on WEP, provides
encryption and integrity.
Authentication can be provided by 802.1X and
EAP, when using enterprise mode, or by PSK
when using personal mode.
But WPA didn’t last very long.
After more secure protocols and hardware were
developed, WPA2 was released and it includes
the following protocols.
CCMP is used to provide encryption and MIC.
And again, authentication can be done via
802.1X using EAP or PSK.
And finally in 2018 WPA3 was released.
It uses GCMP for encryption and integrity.
And once again supports 802.1X based or PSK
based authentication.
In addition to that, it offers several additional
security features, here are a few examples.
There is a feature called PMF, protected management
frames.
It protects 802.11 management frames from
eavesdropping and forging.
Actually this was available as an optional
feature in WPA2, but WPA3 makes it mandatory.
Also, SAE, simultaneous authentication of
equals.
It protects the four-way handshake when using
personal mode authentication.
The last example I’ll give is forward secrecy.
It prevents data from being decrypted after
it has been transmitted over the air.
This protects against attacks in which an
attacker captures wireless frames, and then
tries to decrypt them later to read the contents.
Okay, that’s all I’ll say about the WPA
certifications.
Basically, they take the various security
protocols I mentioned in this video, and package
those protocols into standard sets.
Hardware is then tested and certified to make
sure it supports these standards.
Okay, here’s what we covered in this video.
I’d say the content of this video was quite
wide but shallow.
You got a general overview of a lot of different
security features.
Make sure you know the difference between
PEAP and EAP-TLS, or CCMP and GCMP, for example.
Also know which protocols are included in
WPA, WPA2, and WPA3.
And make sure to watch until the end of the
quiz for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA, the best practice
exams for the CCNA.
Now let’s go to quiz question 1.
What does GMAC provide to a secure wireless
connection?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the best answer is B, MIC, message integrity
check.
GMAC is used as part of the GCMP protocol
to verify message integrity as a message integrity
check.
GCMP is part of the WPA3 certification.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 2.
Which of the following are part of the 802.1X
authentication architecture?
(select three) Okay, pause the video now to
select the best answers.
The answers are A, supplicant.
D, authenticator, and E, authentication server.
These are the three entities involved in 802.1X
authentication.
In an 802.11 wireless network, the wireless
client is the supplicant, the AP or WLC is
the authenticator, and a server such as a
RADIUS server acts as the authentication server.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following encryption and integrity
methods is considered most secure?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, GCMP.
These protocols were developed in the order
WEP, TKIP, CCMP, and then GCMP, and GCMP is
the most secure.
If your hardware supports it, it is recommended
to use GCMP whenever possible.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following AES methods requires
a certificate on both the supplicant and the
AS?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, EAP-TLS.
Both PEAP and EAP-TLS involve digital certificates
for authentication, but PEAP only requires
that the AS has a certificate.
EAP-TLS, on the other, uses certificates to
authenticate both the supplicant and the AS,
so they both need a certificate.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following WPA3 security features
protects the four-way handshake when using
personal mode authentication?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, SAE.
SAE is simultaneous authentication of equals,
and it allows for a more secure four-way handshake
during authentication using personal mode.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s try a bonus question from Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA.